I was born and raised in Brazos County. My people
settled in Brazos County in about 1872. My
grandfather settled up on top of this hill. I am now
83 years old. Okay, so that makes what year were you
born in? 1891. And your full name is? Noah C. Cole.
Well, Mr. Cole, you said your grandfather settled
up there on the hill. What brought him to this area?
They came from Alabama down here in Texas. I don't
know if they were hunting, but I lied, I guess.
That's a lie. What kind of occupation was your
grandfather in? Farmers. Farmers and ranchers.
So they just moved down here? Do you know what crops
they grew or have any idea? Yes. People, when they
first came here, this land wasn't settled in
mostly cattle range, mostly cattle range and wild
cattle and things like that, but they all produced
crops, raised farm products. Cotton and corn and
other things like that. Okay, so then is, you know,
like when your father came along, what was his, did
he do ranching too? Yes, he did ranching. He bought
land and owned land. On the gin. Really? Yes. We
have a gin down there, old gin down there that he
bought. They raised considerable cotton.
Of course at that time they didn't have the the
machinery that we have today. We use horses and
mules. And no up-to-date cultivators or anything
like that. So you just stayed in this area then? And
we had tenant farmers here. My daddy had a good many
tenant farmers that raised cotton and corn. He
accumulated quite a bit of land around. And
so then as you grew up you just kind of fell in his
footsteps? Yeah, I fell in his footsteps. And we
was in eight miles, uh, well you might put it in six
miles of A&M College. And one of my cousins that
raised right up here on the other side of us, he was
the director of A&M College at one time. D.S.
Buchanan. So, um, did you attend school or did you?
I attended the, uh, we had country schools at that
time, and I went from the country schools here to
Sam Houston State Normal. And I finished at Sam
Houston State Normal in 1913.
Taught school a good many years. Well, did you, did
you marry later on then? Yes, I married after the
World War I. I enlisted in World War I. I was in the
World War I, and And when I came back from World War
I, I married one of the neighbor girls around here.
Let me get her name right.
Clara Boykin Jones. That was my wife. Her people
lived across the road. Yeah. I've known her all my
life. So did y'all, did you bring your children?
Did y'all have children? We didn't have any
children. We didn't, unfortunately never had any
children. And she died getting many years ago. Oh,
okay. And I continued on to live here. I had lots of
brothers and sisters. I had three brothers and two
sisters. Oh. Well are they all still in this
immediate area? They're all dead except me. Oh, so
what did they, were your brothers involved in
ranching too? Yes, my brother, well I had one, my
older brother was a district clerk for Brazos
County for many years, and he retired from that,
but he's dead now. And I had one sister, taught
school in the surrounding areas for years, and I
did too. Oh, that's interesting. She was a teacher
in Brown High for years. Do you have any idea what
year she started teaching there? Oh, I don't know
what year she started teaching, but she taught all
of her life. And she was 87 years old, 85 years old
when she died, sunshine cold. Well, you said you
were into ranching and everything. What kind of
changes has there been made since you started, you
know, as far as technology and stuff like that?
Well, it was mostly the ranching, and really from
the ranching, as the country settled, as the
people settled in here, they began to raise the
crops of cotton and corn and things that went along
with it. And we raised cotton and corn for years
until we might say along, well,
I believe I was still, we were still farming here in
19, we might say 1915, 20. And I
went to war in 1917, came back, still continue to
farm, We had some mighty hard years later on. So
speaking of those hard years, can you remember the
Depression? Yes, I don't know exactly what year it
was. I imagine from 1925 and what we'd call 1925 or
1930, and there was some mighty hard, dry years. It
didn't rain for two years. and our stock water oil
would drop. We didn't have the tanks and things in
there that we have now. We didn't have the wells.
And the government came in, very good to us, helped
us to build tanks, wells. Okay, well then later on
in the late 30s, middle 30s, did the depression
affect you, the national depression? Oh yes, I
guess so to a certain extent. What, did y'all
continue to farm, or did you have to find other
work? Yes, we just continued to farm. We were right
on. Okay. Did the government help you through
that? Yes, the government helped. The
government, I didn't, I wasn't needing any help at
that time, but the government had WPA labor. They
had to build some of the schoolhouses. And, not
only that, we, and during Roosevelt
administration, which one of those presidents,
wasn't Teddy, was it, what was it, D. Franklin?
Franklin. Franklin D. Roosevelt, I believe. We
had what we, times and conditions were hard. We
killed cattle. I killed calves and fired out of the
head, hauled them over in the pasture. I killed
young cows. We plowed up the cotton, destroyed it.
Well, as you, you know, as you grew older and
everything, can you remember any famous figures
coming to, you know, Bryan College Station area,
such as maybe politicians or something? Oh, yes, I
do. There's one of my kinfolk, some of my kinfolk,
W.S. Byrne, George Byrne, was Speaker of the
House, was a representative. during some of those
years, and now he's still alive, practicing law in
Brown. Yeah.
Oh, and I remember many,
Law Henderson. I especially remember one man that
was affiliated, that worked with the foreman
class of people, that was Mr. Beeson. He was the
county agent of Rattlers County. And he did work
then that they're redoing right now. He killed
cows. He taught us how to kill caves and cows and to
process them. And we used the process at that time.
We'd kill those caves and make them up in chili and
can it. We had home canners. We'd can those stuff,
can that stuff up, meats. Right here? Yes, in your
own home. I have one of my old kennels here in my
house right today.
And we raised our hogs. We had our meat. We raised
our vegetables. My wife was a great hand with the
home demonstration agent. They canned
everything we needed. We didn't have the At that
time, we didn't have the deep freeze, you see. And
then, of course, later on this time, come on down,
we used the deep freeze. Okay, well, can you
remember when the railroad came through Bryan
County? No, I don't remember, but I had my
grandfather, I had a bed that my grandfather
brought over here to Milligan. It first stopped at
the little town of Milligan down here. little
college and but I don't remember what year it came
through here. Okay so did it influence your your
occupation your ranching occupation in any way?
No not any more than just town built up and the first
courthouse was established first court was here
down here on about three miles down the road down
here then they moved it on up And then they moved it
on up to Boom, Boom, Boom. That's the town up there
called Boom. Okay, well, for social activities,
what type of did y'all engage in? Well,
practically the same thing they do today. We had
parties and things like that. We didn't have no
automobiles until about 1917, a little after
1917. Can you remember the first automobile that
came? I remember the first one I got, and I was going
to school in Huntsville when the doctor in
Huntsville had a car, and he had, the only car he
had, he had a dog. It always run ahead of that thing.
When I came back from World War I, I had, I bought a
1917 Ford, me and my brother. We said I wanted you in
World War I. And I bought a 1917 Ford, and I've been
buying Fords ever since.
So then your social life was pretty much, was
church an influence in your life? Yes, church. We
had a church up here right up the road here, a pretty
good Baptist church that was organized by my
people. And I've been deacon in that church ever
since I was large enough. My grandfather, my
grandmother, my dad, my mother, several brothers
and sisters were buried right up here side the
road. Broughton High Tribal Baptist Church. OK.
Well, so all of your folks were just relatively
from around this same area? They just, they never?
Well, they came all the, they came in from
everywhere. My mother, I had one group she knew,
different communities like Steep Hollow was a, we
had kin folks in the Steep Hollow community, the
Dansmans, the Peters. And all the old, old
families that was originally here. My book, I have
a book on those people that were sitting. So Mr.
Peters is related to you then, is that? Mm-hmm. His
grandfather, my grandmother's brothers and
sisters.
Oh, I see the connection now. Oh, okay. He was down
the other day. We played dominoes, he and I and his
brother and a fellow over there in college over
there, Marco. We played dominoes. It was a Tuesday
night. He and our partner, we played dominoes this
past time. So what about Christmas time? Has
Christmas changed any since you were younger? Oh,
no, just about the same. We had parties to the
community and things like that. One of the
greatest things I can remember that affected all
of us, we used to, years ago, the water proposition
was a scarce proposition, and the lights, you see.
We had to cut stone wood, cook on the stove, and my
old home was right across the road, 240 acres over
there. Well did the, speaking of lights and
running water and everything, how did y'all cope?
We didn't have lights and running water. How did
y'all cope? We had well water systems. Okay, well
then later on is... Then later on we, the governor
kept to put in some tanks and during those hard
times, you might call it during the Depression,
I'd say during the Depression, he put in tanks and
And of course as we telephones increased, the REA
came in, and we of course all began to modernize our
homes, you see. There's only one home in this
community that I remember that I can say this
offhand is still standing. That's a house right
down there, a nice house, been well kept, but all
the rest of the homes I've been torn down and
rebuilt, you see. Okay, this house that doesn't
have it, that is still the same, is anyone living in
this house? No, it belongs to the Williams State
down there, a big place down there. They've kept it
up. No one's living in it, right? No one. They have
it furnished. They come out and stay during the
weekend and things like that. Big ranch on it.
Okay, well this book, The Baron, is that the title
of the book? That's the history of the Byrne
family. Okay, how did that come to be written? Do
you have any? Some of the Byrnes, they wanted to
write it. There's a lady here in town. Okay, is that
about your folks? Yeah, my people in there. My
mother was, she was connected with the Byrnes. She
was, this book was, they originally came from
Alabama.
And this Barron gives a live history of the Barron
families and the different connections of all in
the county.
And she was one of the, she was a Soules. And that was
one of the beginning of the Barron family, the
Soules. So she was connected to the Barron's
three? She connected to, we connected to the
Barron's soldiers, and then everybody else in
town, in the county. Todd's.
So that book was just written by someone? The one
with the family. Oh, okay. Well, do you remember,
how about school? Was it, what did you think of
school? Oh, well, school then was just like I
taught school. School then was just about like it
is. Well, it's of course more modernized now like
that. We had out there, we had three teachers. We
had three teachers, a principal and two
assistants that taught school. I taught there
several years, and then I taught in different
communities. Okay, well, do you remember any of
the people that You know, were your teachers, say,
in school? Oh yeah, I remember I got
students all around the country. Okay, well what
about when you were a student? Do you remember any,
like who was your teachers or principal at that
time? Oh yes, one of our principal teachers I tell
you was E.K. Barton. He was a Fine teacher. I
believe he's dead now, but he had people living
around overstate. He married into one of the
families out there, married into the Jones
families, and they've got people living around.
Do you remember any of your other teachers or
people that influenced you? Well,
I can't recall too many of them right now that I went
to school to. I remember the teachers more than I. I
spent three years down at the hospital. I remember
the Estill, President Estill down there, and
different teachers down there. It's a normal, it
was a normal at that time, and later on it was added,
made into a college, you see, in 1913 when I
graduated. It was a normal school, a teacher
school. Well, when you were in, you know, at the
same Houston Normal, was it, did you work at that
time, or did you just go to college? I went to
college, I boarded down there. Okay, what, did
they have dormitory facilities? Yes, they had,
no, they lived in private homes, most of them,
different homes around there, boarding the
students, you see. Well, what was your, how were
you fixed up to stay there? I was, I was a 10 or 15 boy,
The girl, well the girl had separate dormitories,
separate homes, and the boys down there. What was
your main college, your main course of study
there? I took, well I don't know what you would call
that. We had some manual training. We had,
and
Just a general education more for teachers.
Sam Houston Normal was a normal to produce
teachers. Oh, I see. Okay, so it was just more or
less a teacher college. Yeah, it was a teacher
college, and then later on it came into a
regular... Began to offer more programs. More
courses. It's a big school, isn't it? Yes, it is.
Around the period of World War I, you mentioned
that you enlisted and everything. Did you, how did
that affect your life? Around World War I? World
War I?
Well, when we came back from World War I, I was in the
Navy, and I got my discharge from Camden, New
Jersey. Battleship I was waiting for the
battleship Utah to go into commission. I got my
discharge plan and came back and take my place
right over in the community as I did beforehand.
I done been to school you see then and I would get to
teach some of the smaller schools, some of the
schools around in the different parts of the
counties, different county, Owen Grimes County,
some over here. I taught right over here in the
south of A&M College for three years. There's a
place out there known as Union Hill.
But we raised cattle and we had to fight the pest,
the tick people and everything like that all
through those things. Well what, how did y'all go
about fighting it? What kind of problems did y'all
have as y'all raised, tried to raise cattle and
everything? We had what they called Texas fever
ticks. And we, they kept cows that wasn't immune
from it would die. And we had to, we built dipping
vats and we dipped those cows for those ticks every
two weeks. And we finally eliminated the fever
ticks Yeah, in Texas. What did y'all use as a dip? Do
you remember? We used arsenic. And just dipped the
cattle in the arsenic? Yes, sir. We dipped those
cows and run those cows through those dipping
vats. We still got those dipping vats today. But we
don't use them when we use spraying outfits now. We
don't. We got rid of the fever tiki in Texas. A&M
College used to have a fence around us where they
called it tic proof. So many people keep ticks with
that cross. Well did that, was there any other
thing that plagued your cattle? Oh yeah, all kind
of insects. And then we had the screwworms that's
been put in just last few years, been one of the
greatest things for the cattlemen we had. We, they
eliminated the screwworm. How'd they go about
doing that? Well they, they took, they caught
these flies. You know, it was a male fly and a female
fly that laid the eggs. And they treated, they
caught these flies, they built the great big
things around it. One of the bitches in Texas is
around over there. And, and they sterilized,
sterilized those flies, you see. And they spread
them out. And they wouldn't hatch, you see.
And that eliminated the school worms. We used to
have to dock the worms every year. It was a
proposition, a big proposition. That was one of
the great benefits of the government. Did they
come in and help y'all? Oh, they did that. Yeah,
they helped in that dipping business. We had to dig
those vats. We had a regular dipping inspector to
see the people that lived there for 14 days. Were
they, they were commissioned by the government to
come out and do that? Well, then other men came in
and helped you? I mean, how did y'all handle that?
Did the men from the community get together? Well,
we just went together and handled it. One father
maybe take his own cows, drive his own cows there.
Maybe some, each one drove his own cattle to the
vats so they wouldn't get them mixed up, you see.
Oh, how'd y'all get your cows to market, or did you
market them, or? The railroad shipped to Dallas.
Oh, through the railroad? Mm-hmm. We didn't have
the, at first we didn't have the, we didn't have
the, like we had that auction range and things like
that, you see. That came on later on, you see. Well
did the, we said, you mentioned when you were
younger did the, about farming, did the boll
weevil have any effect on the process? Oh yes, the
boll weevil was one of the pests we had to deal with.
It put the cotton farmer nearly out of business.
And, of course, we fought the bull wheel just like
we fought everything else, and they're still
fighting. Well, did that affect your father
specifically? Oh, yes, it affected everybody
that lived there. If it wasn't for the bull wheel,
we could make two bales cut to an acre, but the bull
wheel, we different control methods are used and
by cultivation and things like that.
The boll weevil certainly was. The many insects
and things we had, cotton, leafworm, and things
like that. You have all those things. Well, how did
y'all, what did y'all use to control the boll
weevil? Do you have, can you remember? They used
poison, kind of a poison. And the hardest thing in
the world to kill, you put one between two blocks of
ice and it wouldn't kill you. My gosh. Well, what
kind of poison was it, do you know? I don't know what
the name they used. Poison.
OK,
for the continuation of this tape, please turn it
over.